# 8.1 Sequences
### Sequences are Functions

- An <u>sequence</u> is a function that maps natural numbers (or a subset of them) to a set.
- The <u>domain</u> of a sequence is a set of consecutive integers.

<u>Example</u>

- Sequences can represent various types of data, such as a student's GPA over the years they attend college.
$$
g(1) = 2.51, ~~g(2) = 2.77, ~~g(3) = 3.21, ~~g(4) = 3.33
$$
### Notation

- The entire sequence is represented by $\{g_k\}$.
- The value g<sub>k</sub> is called a <u>term</u> of the sequence, and $k$ is the <u>index</u> of $g_k$.
- A single term is represented by $g_k$ (without the curly braces).
$$
g_1 = 2.51, ~~g_2 = 2.77, ~~g_3 = 3.21, ~~g_4 = 3.33
$$
- Sequences can be written with just the terms if the function name and indices are understood or not important.
$$
gpaCollection = [2.51, 2.77,3.21,3.33]
$$
- Sequences can also start with any integer, not just 0 or 1.
$$
\displaylines{
\text{Sequence }\{m_k\}\text{ is a collection of Star Wars films} \\ \\
\begin{aligned}
m_{-3} &= \text{The Phantom Menace} \\
m_{-2} &= \text{Attack of the Clones} \\
m_{-1} &= \text{Revenge of the Sith} \\
m_{0} &= \text{A new Hope} \\
m_{1} &= \text{The Empire Strikes Back} \\
m_{2} &= \text{Return of the Jedi} \\
\end{aligned}
}
$$
### Finite and Infinite

- A <u>finite sequence</u> $\{a_k\}$ has:
	1. A <u>finite domain</u>.
	2. An <u>initial index</u> $m$ and <u>final index</u> $n$, such that $n \ge m$.
	3. An <u>initial term</u> $a_m$ and <u>final term</u> $a_n$.
	4. A bounded set: $a_m,~a_{m+1},~\cdots,~a_n$.

- An <u>infinite sequence</u> $\{b_k\}$ has:
	1. An <u>infinite domain</u>.
	2. An <u>initial index</u> $m$, where $\{b_k\}$ is defined for all indices $k$ such that $k \ge m$.
	3. Indices that approach infinity in the positive direction ($i.e.~k ≥ m$).
	4. A set with no upper or lower bound: $b_m,~b_{m+1},~b_{m+2},~\cdots$

  
### Explicit Formula

- Sequences can be expressed as an <u>explicit formula</u> that shows how $a_k$ depends on $k$.

<u>Example</u>
Triangular numbers are numbers that can be arranged in the shape of a triangle. 

The $n^{th}$ triangular number can be calculated using the formula:

$$
\begin{aligned}
T_n &= \frac{n(n+1)}{2}~\text{for }n \ge 2 \\ \\
&=[3, 6, 10, 15, 21, ...]
\end{aligned}
$$
### Increasing and Decreasing

- For every pair of consecutive indices $k \text{ and } k+1$, a sequence is:

| Property       |     Condition     | Example                                     |
| -------------- |:-----------------:| ------------------------------------------- |
| Increasing     | $a_k \lt a_{k+1}$ | $f(x) = x^3$                                |
| Non-decreasing | $a_k \le a_{k+1}$ | $f(x) = \lfloor \frac {x}{2} \rfloor$       |
| Decreasing     | $a_k \gt a_{k+1}$ | $f(x) = \frac{1}{x}\text{, for } x \in ℤ^+$ |
| Non-increasing | $a_k \ge a_{k+1}$ | $f(x)=-x-\|x-3\| + 6$                       |

- Increasing sequences are always non-decreasing.
- Decreasing sequences are alays non-increasing.
- A horizontal line is neither increasing nor decreasing.
- A horzontal line is is both non-decreasing and non-increasing.

### Geometric Sequences

- A <u>geometric sequence</u> is a sequence of real numbers where every term after the first is found by multiplying the previous term by a <u>common ratio</u> ($r$).

<u>Explicit Formula</u>
$$
\displaylines{
a_n = a_i \cdot r^{n}
}
$$

- $a_i$ = initial term
- $r$ = common ratio

<u>Finite geometric sequence</u>

$$
\displaylines{
a_n = (1000) \cdot (1.005)^n \\
a_i = 1000,~r=1.005 \\ \\
\text{let }m=0,~n=3 \\
\{a_k\} = [~1000, 1005, 1010, 1015.10~]
}
$$

<u>Infinite geometric sequence</u>

$$
\displaylines{
a_n = (1)\cdot(\frac 1 2)^n \\
\text{$a_i = 1$, $r = \frac{1}{2}$} \\ \\
 \{a_k\} = [~1, \frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{4}, \frac{1}{8}, \frac{1}{16}, ~\dots~]
}
$$

### Arithmetic Sequence

- An arithmetic sequence is a sequence of real numbers where each term is found by adding a fixed number called the <u>common difference</u> to the previous term.

<u>Explicit Formula</u>
$$
\displaylines{
	
	a_n = a_i + d \cdot n \\
	\text{for }n \ge 0
}
$$
- $a_i$ = initial term
- $d$ = common difference

<u>Infinite Arithmetic Sequence</u>

$$
\displaylines{
a_n=0 + 5\cdot n \\
\{a_n\}=[~0,5,10,15,~\cdots~]
}
$$

<u>Finite Arithmetic Sequence</u>

$$
\displaylines{
a_n = \pi - \frac \pi {3}\cdot n \\ \\


\text{let }m=0,~n=3 \\

\{a_n\} = [~
	\pi, 
	\frac {2 \pi} {3}, 	
	\frac {\pi} {3},
	0
	~
]
}
$$

# 8.2 Recurrence Relations

### Recurrence Relation

- A rule that defines a term $a_n$ as a function of previous terms in the sequence is called a <u>recurrence relation</u>.

<u>Arithmetic Sequence</u>

-   Arithmetic sequences can be defined by the following recurrence relation:
    -   $a_0 = a$ (initial value)
    -   $a_n = d + a_{n-1}$ for $n \ge 1$ (recurrence relation)
-   Initial value = $a$. Common difference = $d$.

<u>Geometric Sequence</u>

$$
\displaylines{
  a_n = r \cdot a_{n-1} \\
  \text{for }n \ge 1
}
$$ 
- $a_0$ = initial value
- $r$ = common ratio

### Fibonacci Sequence

- Leonardo Fibonacci used a recurrence relation to define the <u>Fibonacci sequence</u>, which models rabbit population growth.
  
Rules: 
- The rabbit colony begins with one pair of newborn rabbits.
- Rabbits must be at least one month old before they can reproduce.
- Every pair of reproducing rabbits gives birth to a new pair (one male and one female) over the course of a month.

$$
\begin{align} 
	f_0 &= 0 \\ 
	f_1 &= 1 \\
	f_n &= f_{n-1} + f_{n-2}\quad{}\mbox{for } n \ge 2  \\ \\
	\{f_n\} &=[~0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, \cdots ~]
\end{align}
$$

### Number of Initial Values

- The number of initial values required depends on which previous terms are used to define the $n^{th}$ term.

- For example, in the Fibonacci sequence, $f_n$ depends on the previous two terms.
  I.e. $f_0$ and $f_1$ are required to define $f_2$
  
### Dynamical Systems

- A <u>dynamical system</u> is a system that changes over time, with its state determined by a set of well-defined rules that depend on the past states of the system.
- In a <u>discrete time dynamical system</u>, time is divided into discrete time intervals, and the state during one interval is a function of the state in previous time intervals.
- The history of the system is defined by a sequence of states, indexed by non-negative integers.

<u>Fibonacci's Rabbit Colony</u>

- Fibonacci's rabbit colony is an example of a discrete time dynamical system.
- Each time interval is a month.
- The state of the system is the number of pairs of rabbits.
- Dynamical systems often give rise to recurrence relations that describe how the system changes over time.


# 8.3 Summations

### Summation Notation

- Summation notation is used to express the sum of terms in a numerical sequence.
- The capital letter sigma $\Sigma$ is used to denote that the terms are to be added together.

$$
\sum_{i=m}^n a_i = a_m + a_{m+1} + \cdots + a_{n-1} + a_n
$$
- $n$ is the <u>upper limit</u> 
- $i$ is called the <u>index</u>
- $m$ is the <u>lower limit</u> 

- Use parentheses to indicate that all the terms are included in the summation.

$$
\begin{aligned}
\sum_{j=1}^n (j + 1) &≠ \sum_{j=1}^n j + 1 \\ \\
&~~~~\sum_{j=1}^n j + 1 = \left( \sum_{j=1}^n j \right) + 1

\end{aligned}
$$

<u>Example</u>

- Consider the sequence: 
$$
\begin{aligned}
a_n &= n^3,\quad{}
\text{for }n = 1, 2, 3, 4 \\ \\
&=1^3 + 2^3 + 3^3 + 4^3 \\
&= 1 + 8 + 27 + 64 \\
&= 100
\end{aligned}
$$
- Summation notation:
$$
\sum_{j=1}^4 j^3 = 1^3 + 2^3 + 3^3 + 4^3 = 100
$$

### Extracting Final Term

- It is often useful to extract or insert a final term into a summation. 
  
$$
\begin{aligned}
  \sum_{k=m}^{n} a_k 
  &= 
  \underbrace{
  a_{m} 
  + a_{m + 1} 
  + a_{m + 2} 
  + \cdots
  + a_{n-1}
  }_{\text{terms $m$ to $n-1$}}
  ~~~+~ 
  \underbrace{a_{n}}_{\text{final term}}
  \quad{}\text{for } n > m
  \\
  &= \sum_{k=m}^{n-1} a_k + a_n 
  \\
  

\end{aligned}
$$

<u>Example</u>

$$
\begin{aligned}
  \sum_{k=0}^{n} 10^k 
  &= 
  \sum_{k=0}^{n-1} 10^k +10^n
\end{aligned}
$$

### Variable Limits

- Lower or upper limits are denoted by variables.
- Limits are require variables for evaluation of the sum, provided as values.
- A limit can be either finite or infinite.
$$
\sum_{k = 0}^{∞} \left(\frac {1}{2}\right)^k=2
$$

- Variables can be subsituted.

<u>Example</u>
$$
\displaylines{
	\sum_{k=1}^n \sqrt{k - 1} \\ \\
	\text{let } j=k-1\\
\underbrace{
\begin{aligned}
	\text{when } k&=1\\
	j = 1 - 1 &= 0
\end{aligned}
}_{\text{New Lower Limit}}
~~~~
~~~~
\underbrace{
	\begin{aligned}
		\text{when } k&=n\\
		j &= n - 1
	\end{aligned}
}_{\text{New Upper Limit}}
\\ \\
\sum_{k=1}^n \sqrt{k - 1} = \sum_{j=0}^{n-1} \sqrt{j} \\ \\
\begin{aligned}
\sum_{k=1}^{10} \sqrt{k - 1} &= \sum_{j=0}^{9} \sqrt{j} \\ 
&= 19.306
\end{aligned}
}
$$

### Closed Form

- A <u>closed form</u> expresses a summation as an algebraic formula.

### Arithmetic Closed Form

- A series with a constant difference $(d)$ between consecutive terms.
$$
\displaylines{
\sum_{k=0}^{n-1} (a + kd) = an + \frac{d(n-1)n}{2} \\
\text{for any integer $n \geq 1$}
}
$$

<u>Example</u>

$$
\begin{aligned}
\sum_{k=0}^{44} (2 + k \times5) &= 2(45) + \frac{5(45-1)45}{2} \\ \\
&=90 + 5 \times 45 \times \frac {44}{2} \\ \\
&=5 \times 22 \times 45 \times + 90
\end{aligned}
$$

<u>Example</u>
$$
\begin{aligned}
\sum_{k=0}^{5}(3k + 1) 
&= 1 + 4 + 7 + 10 + 13 + 16 
&& = 51
\\
n-1&=5\\
n &=6 \\
\sum_{k=0}^{5}(3k + 1) 
&= (1)(6) + \frac {3 \cdot (6 - 1) \cdot 6} {2} \quad{} 
&&an + \frac{d(n-1)n}{2} \\
&=6 + \frac {90} {2} \\
&= 51
\end{aligned}
$$
### Geometric Closed Form

- A series with an initial term $(a)$ and constant ratio $(r)$ between consecutive terms.
$$
\displaylines{
	\sum_{k=0}^{n-1} a\cdot r^k = \frac{a(r^n-1)}{r-1}
	\\ \\
	\text{for any real number $r ≠ 1$ and any integer $n \geq 1$}
}
$$
<u>Example</u>

$$
\begin{aligned}
\sum_{k=0}^{5} 4 \left(\frac {1} {2}\right)^k 
&= 4 + 2 + 1 + \frac 1 2 + \frac 1 4 + \frac 1 8
&& = \frac{63} 8
\\ \\
n-1&=5\\
n &=6 \\ \\
\sum_{k=0}^{5} 4 \left(\frac {1} {2}\right)^k 
&= \frac {4[(\frac{1}{2})^6-1]} { \frac 1 2 -1 }
&& \frac{a(r^n-1)}{r-1}
\\
&= \frac {4[\frac 1 {64} - 1]} { -\frac 1 2} \\
&= 2 \cdot 4[1 - \frac 1 {64}] = 8 \cdot \frac {63} {64} \\
&= \frac {63} {8}
\end{aligned}
$$

### Exponential Growth

- A bacterial colony grows at a rate of 4% every hour.
- Consider a colony with a population of 1000.
- How large would the colony be after 24 hours?
  
$$
\begin{aligned}
	\sum_{k=0}^{24} 1000(1.04)^k 
	&= 1000\cdot\frac{(1.04)^{25} - 1}{ 1.04 - 1} \\
	&= \textasciitilde 41,646
\end{aligned}
$$

# 8.4 Mathematical induction

### Mathematical Induction

- A <u>proof technique</u> for proving statements about elements in a sequence.
- Establishes that a statement parameterized by $n$ is true for all positive integers $n$.

### Components of Inductive Proof

- Using an inductive proof we can verify the truth of statements such as:
  
  The sum of first $n$ Fibonacci numbers is equal to the $(n + 2)^{th}$ Fibonacci number minus 1

#### Base Case

- The <u>base case</u> proves the theorem for the first value in the sequence.
- Typically assigns $n = 1$ to the summation index, but can assign higher integers, e.g. $n = 2$.

$$
\boxed{
\quad{} %% left padding %% 
\displaylines{
~\\  %% top padding %% 
\text{Fibonacci Sequence} \\ 
\\ 
\{a_n\} = 0,1,1,2,3,5,8,13, \cdots \\
\sum_{k = 2}^{n} [ a_{n-2} + a_{n-1} ]
= a_{n+2} - 1 
\\ \\
\begin{aligned}
	\sum_{k = 2}^{2} [ a_{0} + a_{1}]
	\quad{}\quad{}
	&a_4 - 1
	\\ \\
	\sum_{k = 2}^{2} [ 0 + 1 ] = 1
	\quad{}\quad{}
	&	2 - 1 = 1
\end{aligned}
\\~  %% bottom padding %% 
} 
\quad{}  %% right padding %% 
}
$$

#### Inductive Step

-   Assumes the theorem is true for $k$, and proves it for $k + 1$.
-   Example: If you have three wishes on day $k$, you can get three wishes for day $k+1$.

### Principle of Mathematical Induction

-   If the base case and inductive step are both true, the theorem holds for all positive integers.

$$
\boxed{
\quad{} %% left padding %% 
\displaylines{
~\\  %% top padding %% 
\begin{array}{l}
	\text{Principle of mathematical induction.} \\
	\text{Let } S(n) \text{ be a statement parameterized by a positive integer } n. \\
	\text{Then } S(n) \text{ is true for all positive integers } n \text{, if:} \\
	\quad \quad \text{1. } S(1) \text{ is true (the base case).} \\
	\quad \quad \text{2. For all } k \in \mathbb{Z}^+, \text{ } S(k) \text{ implies } S(k+1) \text{ (the inductive step).}
\end{array}
\\~  %% bottom padding %% 
} 
\quad{}  %% right padding %% 
}
$$

#### Inductive Step and Inductive Hypothesis

- The <u>inductive step</u> states that an infinite sequence of implications are true.
- This implies that the truth of $S(k)$ guarantees the truth of $S(k+1)$.
- The <u>inductive hypothesis</u> is the assumption that $S(k)$ is true.
- The inductive hypothesis serves as the basis for proving the implication between $S(k)$ and $S(k+1)$.
- It assumes the truth of $S(k)$ and allows for the deduction or inference of $S(k+1)$ being true as well.

$$
\boxed{
\quad{} %% left padding %% 
\displaylines{
~\\  %% top padding %%
	\text{Inductive Step:} \quad{}\quad{}
	\text{For all }k \in \mathbb{Z}^+, \\ \\
	\begin{aligned}
	~S(k) \text{ implies }S(k+1) ~~~\longleftrightarrow 
	&\phantom{∧~~} S(1) 
	\text{ implies } S(2) \\

	&∧ S(2) \text{ implies } S(3)  \\
	&∧ S(3) \text{ implies } S(4) \\
	&∧ \cdots
	\end{aligned}
\\~ %% top padding %% 
}
\quad{} %% right padding %% 
}
$$


